In this module, we spent quite a bit of
time talking in general terms about how
data is stored and manipulated.
We've tried to avoid focusing too
much in any one type of software or
software vendor.
The reason for
this is simply is that different
organizations use different tools.
Our objective in this course is to give
you a strong foundation in data analytics
that you can apply anywhere.
In this video however,
we're going to try and
give you a lay of the land in terms
of real data analytics tools.
This means we're going to name names.
A few caveats before we begin.
First, we're only going to show a subset
of the most popular software and
software vendors that
you're likely to encounter.
There are a lot more options out there.
And our focus on this subset shouldn't
be taken as an endorsement of
only this group.
Secondly, we're going to focus on a
somewhat more traditional group of tools.
If you've watched our other
video on big data in the cloud,
you've seen that there
are literally dozens of tools and
technologies that are emerging
to manipulate and analyze data.
While you definitely want to get familiar
with those, you will almost certainly need
to be able to operate in an environment
that uses more established tools as well.
Finally, the way we group these tools
is only one way to look at the world.
Other folks may group these
tools in different ways or
take exception with how we've done it.
That's okay.
I encourage you to learn as much
as you can about technology and
reach your own conclusions about which
tools are best for which functions.
Also keep in mind that these tools
are evolving all the time, and
most vendors are trying to expand their
solutions to include more functionality.
Okay, let's start by defining some classes
of tools that you're likely to encounter.
Namely, database systems,
standard reporting tools,
dashboarding tools, data visualization
tools, data exploration tools, and
statistically modeling and
advanced programming tools.
Broadly speaking, this ordering of tools
begins with the most IT or development
centric, and moves towards tools that are
more analytic or exploratory in nature.
We talked quite a bit about database
systems in our previous videos.
As a reminder,
these tools are used create, maintain, and
extract data from databases.
In this video, we'll focus on
the most popular options for
relational database systems.
Standard reporting tools are used to
provide stable repetitive use of data.
Usually standard reports are created once
we've already identified a specific way of
looking at data that we think is
particularly useful or insightful.
We use reporting tools to
automate the generation of these
reports on some periodic basis.
Monthly, weekly, daily, hourly, so
we don't have to do it annually.
These reports may or
may not provide some limited
manipulated functions like filtering or
draw down capability, and they're usually
directed toward business and users.
Standard reporting tools were some of the
first business intelligence tools created
and have been around for quite a while.
Although the level of sophistication and
usability is increased
substantially overtime.
The idea of dashboarding is
an extension of standard reporting.
As more and more standard reports
are created in an organization,
it becomes more difficult to isolate the
most important pieces of information that
an executive or other decision maker
might need to make sense of the business.
One solution to this problem is
to take a subset of reports and
present them in one simplified
view that allows the most
important metrics to be quickly
identified and interpreted.
Dashboards also tend to
be a bit more dynamic and
may present more timely information
than some standard reports.
As the name suggests, the analogy
here is the dashboard in your car,
which allows you to see the most important
things that are going on as you drive.
Executive dashboarding emerged from
the executive information systems
in the 1980s, but
really gained popularity in the 1990s.
But like standard reporting tools,
the sophisticated dashboarding
tools continues to evolve.
While we may or
may not spend time developing reports or
dashboards, the idea of data visualization
is squarely within the domain of the data
analyst data visualization is the process
of arranging data in such a way that we
can more easily see what's going on and
draw conclusions based on what we see.
The idea of data visualization has
been around for hundreds of years, but
it's only been in the last decade or so
that the class of sophisticated tools
explicitly designed to make sense of large
amounts of complex data have emerged.
These tools both the facilitate the
aggregation and manipulation of data and
provide a spectrum of advance
visualization techniques to the user.
In fact, these tools are quickly
becoming the work course applications in
many business analytics organizations.
Data exploration is an intelligent
extension of the idea of data
visualization.
Data exploration tools seek to
proactively guide the data analyst
by automatically scanning data and
providing cues or
suggestions on what thing the data
analyst might look at next.
They also provide advanced navigation
tools that allow the analyst to
efficiently explore a data set.
These capabilities are most often
built into some of the same tools that
specialize in data visualization.
The last class of tools we'll introduce
are statistically modeling and
advanced programming tools.
These tools are used to
execute highly sophisticated
analytical procedures on data,
often using statistical techniques.
They're the core tools of data scientists,
and
a key part of the data
analyst toolkit as well.
They range from highly integrated
interface driven software packages to raw
programming environments where analysts
can manipulate data directly using one or
more programming languages.
Now that we've defined some of
the classes and tools that are out there,
let's try and map them out and get
a sense for who some of the players are.
Again the way we'll do this is just
one way of looking at the world.
You may find another view that makes more
sense to you based on your experience.
I'll start by outlining two dimensions,
on the horizontal we use the same
classifications spectrum we just covered.
We'll start on the data based
tools on the left and proceed
all the way to the statistical modeling in
advance programming tools on the right.
On the vertical, we use something
that's a little more subjective.
One way I like to think of tools
is by a combination of their
technical sophistication and
general cost range.
For example, you may have tools
that are very expensive or
built on open source software.
But they usually have some limitations or
require more overhead to use.
Alternately, you might have tools
that are intended to be large scale
enterprise software suites that come
with establish support structures and
other benefits that
are reflected in their cost.
All place tools in the spectrum based
on general market position in my own
experience, but recognize that many of the
companies that produce these tools provide
options and various price points and
support levels.
Let's start with database systems.
Arguably the simplest,
least expensive, and
most widely available database
software is Microsoft Access.
While most large organizations implement
much more sophisticated systems for
enterprise data needs, you're likely to
come across quite a few localized business
functions that use access for
some purpose.
There are also a couple of reading open
source database software applications
namely MySQL and
PostgreSQL which provide a flexible and
inexpensive option for creating databases.
All Open Source source options
are quickly gaining popularity,
the dominant database applications
are still provided by a few big names.
There's Microsoft SQL server,
IBM DB2, Oracle and Teradata.
It's very likely that at
least some of the data you're
using in analysis is stored in one or
more of these systems.
Let's move on standard reporting.
I'm going to introduced one more
convention of this landscape diagram that
reflects how some of this
tools span more than one area.
And to give a sense for
how specific tools are evolving,
I'll use an arrow like this one extending
from the Access icon to reflect that
Access provides some reporting capability
in addition to database functionality.
Not surprisingly the tool that embodies
this idea in spades is Microsoft Excel.
Excel is a very flexible
tool that can be used for
almost any function on our spectrum with
low to medium degrees of sophistication.
It is also used in almost every
organization that exists today,
and it's understood by perhaps more people
than any other application we'll discuss.
Microsoft also has a complimentary
added to Excel called power pivot,
which extends the business intelligent
capabilities of the basic Excel software.
Most companies however use something
a bit more sophisticated for
their standard reporting needs.
A leading open source tool is
called Pentaho, but again,
the market is led by some long standing
software tools by large vendors,
namely SAP's Business Objects, Oracle's
OBIEE, IBM's Cognos, and MicroStrategy.
For dashboarding, some of the early
products were Xcelsius and crystal reports
both of which are currently part of SEP
business intelligent product portfolio.
All the major standard boarding
tools as well as Pentaho
have extended functionality that
facilitate the creation of dashboards, and
often the tools of choice of how we
automated and distributed reports and
dashboard delivery at
the end of process level.
However, there are somewhat
newer class of tools
that attack the idea of dashboarding
from an analytical perspective
versus from the data where it
has reporting perspective.
Tools like TIBCO Spotfire, Tableau,
QlikView and Microsoft's Power BI look to
enable data exploration and visualization,
and then enable the deployment and
distribution of those visualizations to
a broader user group including executives.
Where these tools are evolving most
rapidly is in the data exploration space
by making an increasingly easier and
more intuitive to find the most
interesting insights in the data.
Some of these tools like Spotfire, have
gone so far as to explicitly integrated
more advanced statistical tools
into the same software application.
In Spotfire's case the statistical power
the S-Plus application is integrated into
their software suite, however, there are
number of powerful standalone statistical
applications that are broadly used
in data Science and analytics.
One that is rapidly gaining popularity
is the open source R application.
R is very flexible, it can be incorporated
into a lot of other processes and
applications.
In fact, many of the other tools in this
landscape are increasingly being enhanced
to allow or incorporate some use of R.
There's also a very large installed base
of users in a number of other more refined
applications like SAP predictive
analytics, IBM's SPSS, and SAS.
Generally speaking, as we move from
stand reporting to dashboarding
to data visualization and exploration and
to statistical modeling, we find that the
skill sets that the analyst using those
tools become somewhat more sophisticated
and sometimes more programming intensive.
For example,
to use R we typically need to write at
least some code to execute a procedure.
In the extreme case,
we may not even want or
need any of the software
to operate on the data.
We may actually want the high
degree of control and
performance that comes with writing code
directly against the data ourselves.
There are many languages that
one can use to do this, but
two of the most popular are Python and
Java.
Manipulating data directly in
code can allow us to perform
certain operations that are not
supported in other software.
And can allow us to embed analytical
operations directly into other
applications.
So what we've created here is a landscape
of some of the most popular data tools.
Hopefully, you come away from this video
with a better sense of the type of
activities these applications support and
can recognize how they're used when you
come across them in your organization.